---
ID: 456
post_title: Social Spending and Immigration
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-05-26 05:21:08
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=456
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/146449535962/social-spending-and-immigration
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "146449535962"
---
<p>Scott Alexander recently did an article on <a href="http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/05/23/three-great-articles-on-poverty-and-why-i-disagree-with-all-of-them/">poverty and its causes</a>  <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--1" id="enref--1">1</a></sup>.  Both in the comments for that article, and in a footnote was the claim that a large-scale expansion of welfare spending and a large-scale expansion of immigration are incompatible policies, “<em>And then there’s the whole open borders idea, which probably isn’t very compatible with basic income at all.</em>” In this post, I will discuss the relationship between welfare programs and immigration, and I will discuss how both goals might be navigated.</p>
<p>There are two types of issues that a greatly expanded welfare system interacting with greatly expanded immigration could create</p>
<ol><li>The welfare migration issue. You don’t want large numbers of people migrating primarily for the possibility of accessing social services.</li>
<li>The underclass issue. You don’t want an underclass of migrants that are deprived of substantial participation in the economic and or political system.</li>
</ol><p>These two issues create a bit of a tradeoff. You don’t welfare migration, but if you let immigrants in but cut them off, you risk creating an underclass (if the immigration levels are sufficiently large).</p>
<p>There is also the income effect issue, where, even when immigrating for good reasons immigrants may net use government services due to having lower than average incomes. However, I am not sure this is an inherent problem, even if it results in some net harm to the native born. To the extent that immigration restrictions have allowed the income of the typical American to exceed what is viable for the rest of the world, they are unjustified, and net harmful to the typical person in the world. The maintenance of this advantage is not sufficient justification for restrictions on immigration in my opinion. However, such issues do provide practical political issues for those wanting to reduce immigration restrictions.</p>
<p>The studies I will discuss show enough of an effect of benefits on migration to be significant, but one that is sufficiently small as to not be catastrophic. I believe that the optimal way of navigating these tradeoffs are to phase in benefits based on time spent by the immigrant in the country, while still dramatically increasing the number of immigrants allowed into the country. This can be done even when the level of benefits provided is increasing or even when a BIG is enacted.</p>
<p><strong>How Big a Deal is Welfare Migration </strong></p>
<p>In order to find out to what extent immigrants could be driven to migrate for increased benefit access, it is useful to look at what happens within countries, and within free-migration zones like the European Union. Current cross-country migration to countries like the U.S is less relevant for this because the process of admission of immigrants is in part designed to filter out such people.</p>
<p>De Giorgi et. al. in their 2009 paper <em> <a href="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927537109000062">Welfare migration in Europe</a></em> <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--2" id="enref--2">2</a></sup>, published in the journal <em>Labour Economics</em>, looked into the extent to which the expansion of the European Union caused welfare migration. They found “<em>a significant but small effect of the generosity of welfare on migration decisions … large enough to distort the distribution of migration flows</em>“. They found that an increase in the typical welfare benefit could be predicted to have about 37% of the effect that a wage increase of the same relative proportion would have. De Giorgi et. al. looked at the correlation between the generosity of welfare benefits (as measured by “the ratio between income out of work – i.e. from welfare benefits – and income in work – i.e. some measure of the average wage”) and migration patterns. They controlled for the average wage and unemployment rate. They got their data on migration levels by country and time of migration from The European Community Household Panel and their data on welfare benefits from The OECD Database on Benefit Entitlements and Replacement Rates.</p>
<p>Terra McKinnish’s 2006 paper <a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3177299/"><em> Welfare-induced migration at state borders: New evidence from micro-data</em></a>, published in the <em>Journal of Public Economics, </em><sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--3" id="enref--3">3</a></sup> looks at how state by state differences in welfare spending in the United States affects migration between U.S states. She found evidence of welfare migration. While the correlation that indicates welfare migration is clear and significant, there is low confidence about the estimate of the magnitude of this effect  due to the low statistical significance of the estimate of the magnitude. They estimate that every $100/year increase in AFDC benefits will “increase the welfare participation of in-migrants by 0.32 percentage points relative to native-born”. She used data from the U.S Census Bureau.</p>
<p>The 2003 paper by Kaestner et. al. <em><a href="https://core.ac.uk/download/files/153/6707936.pdf">Migration consequences of welfare reform</a></em> published in the Journal of Urban Economics <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--4" id="enref--4">4</a></sup> looked at the effect of the late 1990s welfare reforms on migration between U.S states. They found that the reductions in benefits were correlated with an ” increase in employment-related intrastate migration, and a decrease in non-employment related migration, both within and between states.” The probability of inter-state migration was reduced by 0.4 absolute percentage points or 12 relative percentage points. They used data from the U.S Census Bureau.</p>
<p>A 2008 paper by Dahlberg et. al. published in the <em>Journal of Public Economics </em> titled “<a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Karin_Edmark2/publication/222576687_Is_there_a_race-to-the-bottom_in_the_setting_of_welfare_benefit_levels_Evidence_from_a_policy_intervention._J_Public_Econ_92(5-6)1193-1209/links/0046352452b41b8e43000000.pdf"><em>Is There a ‘Race-to-the-Bottom’ in the Setting of Welfare Benefit Levels? Evidence from a Policy Intervention</em></a>” <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--5" id="enref--5">5</a></sup>, looks at the extent to which migration effects can produce race to the bottom effects in Swedish municipalities. They find that there is such a race to the bottom effect and that “the effect is economically as well as statistically significant; if the neighboring municipalities decrease their welfare benefit level by 100 SEK, a municipality decreases its benefit level with approximately 41 SEK”.</p>
<p>De Giorgi et. al., note that the effect of cross-nation immigration, could be presumed to be lower, because of the higher costs and cultural differences with such migration.</p>
<p>Jan Ekberg in a 1999 paper in the Journal of Population Economics titled “<a href="http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s001480050106">Immigration and the public sector: Income effects for the native population in Sweden</a>” <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--6" id="enref--6">6</a></sup> looked into the net effects of immigration on the public treasury in Sweden. Sweden is useful for comparison here because it can show what could happen under greatly larger levels of welfare spending, without the restrictions on immigrant eligibility that occur in the U.S. They find that “there are negative income effects due to the deteriorating employment situation among the immigrants. The yearly positive or negative income effects have at most been 1–2% of the gross national product”</p>
<p><strong>Ways Forward</strong></p>
<p>The benefits of increased immigration are sufficiently large and the effects of immigration effects are sufficiently small that I think it is possible to increase immigration levels by a very large level while still creating a net positive effect. I would suggest that immigrants should be completely ineligible for any benefits for a few years after arrival and that there should be a proportional phase in thereafter. Ie. 1/5 of the benefit the first year of eligibility, 2/5 during the second, and so, on. In the U.S <a href="https://aspe.hhs.gov/basic-report/summary-immigrant-eligibility-restrictions-under-current-law">there are already such time limits in effect</a><sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--7" id="enref--7">7</a></sup>, where eligibility for most social programs does not occur until five years of residency in the U.S. This has helped to keep the fiscal effect of immigrants to the U.S net-positive unlike in Sweden. This type of mechanism partially resolves the underclass issue by providing some eligibility within a few years, but deters immigration for benefits, and allows positive revenue to accumulate the first few years of the immigrant presence (reducing income effects). In short, I think the welfare migration race to the bottom issues are small enough to be mitigable, and the income effect issues are both somewhat small and possible to ameliorate and such that it is dubious on normative grounds to use them as grounds to restrict migration.</p>
<!-- more -->
<p>An archived version of this post is at <a href="http://www.webcitation.org/6ho34bzZ6" rel="nofollow">http://www.webcitation.org/6ho34bzZ6</a></p>