---
ID: 113
post_title: 'I would not press a button that prevented all workplace discrimination against LGBTQA+ at the cost of not being able to fire bigots. This is because I care about the future more than I care about now. I am quite certain that moral progress is happening and niceness is slowly triumphing. Gay people aren&#8217;t going to stop existing in future if they&#8217;re discriminated against now, it&#8217;s not like they didn&#8217;t exist in the past, but bigots increasingly exist less and if we eliminate current bigots (1/2)'
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-10-11 00:46:52
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=113
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/151635781437/i-would-not-press-a-button-that-prevented-all
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "151635781437"
---
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://theunitofcaring.tumblr.com/post/151635485751/i-would-not-press-a-button-that-prevented-all">theunitofcaring</a>:</p>

<blockquote><blockquote><p>then there will be fewer future bigots. Bigots will only exist in the future if we let them learn their opinions off current bigots, which we can prevent by just firing all bigots and keeping them out of the public sphere. Essentially, I expect to win the war long-term, and that makes it a bad idea to make permanent sacrifices in a peace treaty now. (2/2)</p></blockquote><p>I think there are a few key places where I disagree with you here.</p><p>The first one is that, in a society where without a job you do not have adequate access to medical care and you do not have adequate access to food and you do not have adequate access to housing, I think it is unethical to attempt to lock people out of the job market. Making people unable to find jobs will have the effect that they are likelier to experience homelessness, starvation, and inadequate medical care. </p><p>Therefore, even if someone is a bad person, I am not okay with making them unable to find jobs. Even if someone is literally a Nazi I am not okay with making them unable to find jobs, <i>provided that in those jobs they conduct themselves with respect for their coworkers. </i>If someone can’t find a job because they keep saying to their coworkers ‘what a lovely Aryan baby you’ve got there, I hope she grows up to be straight’ then there’s nothing we can do about that. </p><p>But I straight up refuse to adopt as praxis denying people medical care and denying people housing and denying people food because they are in their private lives bigoted. Even if it reduces bigotry, I want no part in any social movement that silences its opponents by ensuring they cannot survive without complying. </p><p>Secondly, I think that willingness to adopt that praxis will mean that you face way more hostility and way slower progress than if you adopt a policy of ‘everyone deserves to be judged at work based only on their performance at work’. People recognize that stance as principled; they are not threatened by it. ‘Drive the bigots to extinction’ is<i> terrifying</i> (to me, and I’m not even one of the bigots) and it will result in people resisting you at every turn, even when your requests are reasonable, because they are afraid that they’re helping you acquire power to destroy them with. And they are correct to be so afraid. And lots of non-bigots who consider destroying bigots to be unacceptable will side with them, and you will turn lots of potential allies into enemies.</p><p>So I think you’re accepting much slower progress and a lot of losses and a lot of harm in order to retain the option of later doing something that would be morally unacceptable <i>anyway</i>. </p><p>Thirdly, I don’t think bigots actually mostly end up bigoted as a consequence of having coworkers who are bigoted. I think they mostly end up bigoted as a consequence of a lack of exposure to people they are prejudiced against who are normal, complicated, flawed human beings. I think working in an office full of LGBT people is much likelier to change the mind of someone prejudiced against LGBT people than being fired from a job for opposing LGBT people. And we’re stipulating that the problem isn’t behavior; it’s fine to fire Bill because he is hostile towards his coworker Sandra ever since she transitioned, it’s just not fine to fire Bill because he posts on messageboards that he wants Trump to run the country. So the LGBT people are not harmed by Bill being their coworker, and Bill is likelier to stop being bigoted.</p><p>Fourthly, I think it is important to design policies as if you might be wrong. If a TERF gets to decide who is bigoted and should be fired, I probably get fired because I think trans-exclusionary radical feminism is ideologically bankrupt and dumb and cruel and this makes me a bigot. If some leftists here on tumblr get to decide who is bigoted and should be fired, I probably get fired because I’m an incrementalist who thinks communism can’t get resource allocation right. Some companies will fire people who work for animal rights in their free time, on the grounds this is intolerant of people who eat meat; someone else might end up in charge and decide that the litmus test is agreement with them personally - </p><p>- and so on, and so on. The world’s getting better. But I am not optimistic enough to conclude that some future society will be exactly right about what is bigoted, and will never fire people for bigotry who are actually <i>completely right.</i></p><p>“You do not get fired for your private activity outside work” is resilient to society being wrong about what good private activities are. It will never silence activists who are unpopular but right. It will never make it dangerous to your continued wellbeing and ability to earn a living<i> to try to persuade people of your ideas. </i><br /></p><p>“Bigots get fired” is morally unacceptable to me and doesn’t reduce bigotry well if at all and that’s if we happen to be the first people in all of human history to be exactly right about who should be silenced. It’s so much worse if we end up silencing people who were actually trying to bring our attention to social problems we were badly equipped to recognize.<br /></p><p>I am opposed to a world in which people get fired for their private speech, and I believe that the left should be with me.</p></blockquote><p></p>