---
ID: 367
post_title: Power
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-07-11 23:31:33
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=367
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/147260961187/power
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "147260961187"
---
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://multiheaded1793.tumblr.com/post/147259993351">multiheaded1793</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/147259590087">theopjones</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://multiheaded1793.tumblr.com/post/147259401516">multiheaded1793</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://lambdaphagy.tumblr.com/post/147257344364">lambdaphagy</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://argumate.tumblr.com/post/123188648714">argumate</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>If your enemies are powerful, they can hurt you.</p>
<p>If you mess with Putin, he won’t do a damn thing, he doesn’t even need to; an eager subordinate will arrange your assassination with polonium-laced tea, killing you painfully over several weeks as a blatantly obvious warning to others.</p>
<p>That’s power.</p>
<p>Edward Snowden was planning on making some powerful enemies, so he got the fuck out of town when he did. Mad props to a rare realist; chilling in Moscow learning Russian beats spending remainder of life in American prison.</p>
<p>Making a cop run is inviting a beatdown. Irritating border officials is an excellent way to be detained for six hours with optional strip search. Investigating the financial or personal affairs of the elite is a great way to get some attention paid to your own life and times. Everybody knows this.</p>
<p>If you irritate – or worse, <i>threaten</i> – a powerful organisation, you expect to get hurt, and you make plans to avoid it. This isn’t the movies, and the hero doesn’t escape punishment by moral virtue alone.</p>
<p>On the flip side, if your enemies <i>can’t</i> hurt you, maybe they aren’t powerful.</p>
<p>If you spend your time dismantling oppressive power structures and sticking it to the man and you have no fear of reprisals, you might want to check exactly what it is that you’re dismantling and who it is you’re sticking.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote><p>The logic of the witch hunter is simple.  It has hardly changed since <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matthew_Hopkins">Matthew Hopkins’</a> day.  The first requirement is to <i>invert the reality of power</i>.  Power at its most basic level is the power to harm or destroy other human beings.  The obvious reality is that witch hunters gang up and destroy witches. Whereas witches are never, ever seen to gang up and destroy witch hunters.  By this test alone, we can see that the conspiracy is imaginary (Brown Scare) rather than real (Red Scare).<br /><br />Think about it.  Obviously, if the witches had any power whatsoever, they wouldn’t waste their time gallivanting around on broomsticks, fellating Satan and cursing cows with sour milk.  They’re getting burned right and left, for Christ’s sake!  Priorities!  No, they’d turn the tables and lay some serious voodoo on the witch-hunters.  In a country where anyone who speaks out against the witches is soon found dangling by his heels from an oak at midnight with his head<i>shrunk to the size of a baseball</i>, we won’t see a lot of witch-hunting and we know there’s a serious witch problem.  In a country where witch-hunting is a stable and lucrative career, and also an amateur pastime enjoyed by millions of hobbyists on the weekend, we know there are no real witches worth a damn.</p></blockquote>
</blockquote>
<p>Scott wrote against this characteristically snappy-and-cripplingly-reductive bit of Moldbug like 4 years ago, it’s on his old livejournal. Titled something like “Against the formalist account of power relations” or something. Look it up.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>I think this is the essay of Scott’s you are talking about </p>
<p><a href="http://squid314.livejournal.com/354385.html">http://squid314.livejournal.com/354385.html</a><br /></p>
</blockquote>
<p>Yep! Thanks.</p>
</blockquote>

<p>Of note, I think one big thing that Scott misses in that essay (although he comes close with the shoe example) is that conscious power is politically costly to use. A self-interested politician will only use it when the costs of it are outweighed by the benefits. Using force to suppress critics <i><b>looks really bad</b></i>.  

Snowden’s problem was not just messing with someone powerful, but doing so in a way that was so costly to them that it was beneficial to try to take action against him. The reason internet activists don’t have to fear bad things happening to them might not just be because those in power <i>can’t </i>take action. It might because the activists are so weak that those in power <i>have no reason to</i> incur the costs of taking action. </p>