---
ID: 147
post_title: 'Hey, you were asking for Trump supporters to answer some questions. May I turn the tables on you, since you seem to come to your beliefs through reasoning and won&#8217;t respond by calling me mean names and otherwise ignoring me? Do you actually find the recently released video of Trump talking about kissing women very offensive? If so, why? Or is this just grasping at straws looking for something bad to say about him?'
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-10-09 01:17:29
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=147
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/151539309022/hey-you-were-asking-for-trump-supporters-to
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "151539309022"
---
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://theunitofcaring.tumblr.com/post/151538817376/hey-you-were-asking-for-trump-supporters-to">theunitofcaring</a>:</p>

<blockquote><p>So here’s the relevant audio segment:</p><blockquote><p>“You know I’m automatically attracted to beautiful — I just start kissing them. It’s like a magnet. Just kiss. I don’t even wait. And when you’re a star, they let you do it,” Trump says. “You can do anything.”</p><p>“Whatever you want,” says another voice, apparently Bush’s.</p><p>“Grab them by the pussy,” Trump says. “You can do anything.”</p></blockquote><p>I don’t care that Trump is attracted to women. I don’t even particularly care that he cheats on his wives and pursues married ones. I definitely don’t care who he kisses. But that audio segment doesn’t describe consensual kissing between people who are attracted to each other. What does Trump mean by ‘I just start kissing them, I don’t even wait’? I think he pretty clearly means ‘I don’t wait for permission or indications of interest’. He sees an attractive woman, he grabs her and kisses her with indifference as to whether she wants to be kissing him. He grabs at her genitals without checking whether she’s into it. </p><p>What he considers the limiting factor on what you can do with women is not ‘what they’re into’ but ‘what they’ll let you get away with without violently resisting’, and he is proud of the fact that since he is rich, famous, and therefore more powerful than them, most women will not fight back when he kisses them and grabs their crotch without their consent. He considers ‘they let you do it’ all the consent he needs.</p><p>And what does it even mean to let someone do it, if the action under discussion is ‘see beautiful woman, immediately grab her by the pussy’? Is he arguing it’s okay because they don’t manage to scoot out of the way fast enough? Because they don’t scream? Because they don’t slap him? Is there any conceivable avenue for a woman who is not okay with being treated this way to signal disinterest, in Trump’s description of his own behavior?</p><p>If I were at a party or something and a much older, much larger man abruptly kissed me and grabbed at my crotch, I would have to fight back the urge to vomit, I would probably start crying, I would panic, and I’d shut down until he was off of me and I could go wash out my mouth, cry, warn my friends, and get the hell out of there. I wouldn’t scream, because what if he reacts badly to being rejected and punches me out or something? I wouldn’t confront him afterwards, because I’d be sick to the stomach at the thought of interacting with him again. <i>I am pretty sure Trump would interpret that reaction as ‘they let you do it’.</i> I am pretty sure Trump has done exactly that to women who reacted exactly that way, and he thinks this makes him cool.</p><p>So, yeah, that’s kind of a big deal. </p><p>And I don’t think it’s even an uncharitable read on what Trump says. I’ve been trying to think of a more innocuous meaning of ‘I just start kissing them, I don’t even wait’. Maybe he means ‘I wait for them to signal interest, but I don’t wait for us to go on a nice date?’ Except, um, come on, ‘it’s like a magnet, I just start kissing them’ is not language suggesting ‘I flirt with them and escalate quickly’. He didn’t say ‘I’m a star, they’re flattered by the attention’. He didn’t say ‘I’m a star, they’re really responsive to flirting’. He didn’t say ‘I’m a star, they’re all over me.’ <b>He said ‘they let you do it’</b>. The most likely explanation of Trump coming off as if he sexually assaults people is that he, uh, sexually assaults people.</p><p>Some of the coverage of this has emphasized ‘lewd comments’ or ‘obscene language’, but that’s not really the issue; the issue is that Trump brags about how his wealth and status insulate him from the consequences of assaulting people. There were already a lot of women saying that he’d assaulted them, but the candidate himself bragging about it carries more weight.</p><p>I will admit to being slightly confused that this was the tipping point for so many conservatives, given how much appalling behavior they’ve tolerated from Trump already, but that’s a question of ‘why did it take this particular big deal’ not ‘is this a big deal’.</p></blockquote><p><p><i>“I will admit to being slightly confused that this was the tipping point for so many conservatives”</i><br /></p><p><br /></p><p>I think it’s because this particular incident was so unequivocally bad. If you look at Trump’s description of his behaviour, there isn’t much you can say in defence of that or say to explain it away. </p></p>