---
ID: 308
post_title: 'My cancer with &#8220;alternatives to the police&#8221; is that they sound &#8220;let&#8217;s cover up this act of violence because the perpetrator is a Respected Member of the Community&#8221; alarms in my head. Because I feel like I would get the short end of the restorative justice stick because I&#8217;m weird and not popular :/'
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-07-24 22:18:34
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=308
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/147913850902/my-cancer-with-alternatives-to-the-police-is
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "147913850902"
---
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="https://oktavia-von-gwwcendorff.tumblr.com/post/147910813840/my-cancer-with-alternatives-to-the-police-is">oktavia-von-gwwcendorff</a>:</p>

<blockquote><p>Fortunately PrometheaSec would specialize in defending those who lack the abilities to navigate the social capitalism of purely community-based systems, as there would be a clear profit opportunity from serving this otherwise severely underserved market niche.</p><p>I might call my approach “anarcho-pluralism” because I believe that any society that seeks to be actually functional and non-oppressive needs to incorporate a variety of approaches so that people can choose freely on the “meta-market” of not only solutions but also the ways of seeking them. The solution to the tyranny of formal bureaucratic state-managed “markets” is not to submit to the tyranny of formal bureaucratic social processes or the tyranny of structurelessness in petty interpersonal drama. Only if people always everywhere have genuine alternatives can systems actually serve their needs.</p><p>And this is one of the reasons why I reject any ideology that seeks to impose its own systems on everyone; who the fuck is anyone to know what is best for other people?</p><blockquote><p>Yes, it must be admitted frankly and openly that naive or simple reputation dynamics alone are dangerous. Social capitalism can be at least as vicious as any other system. One of the primary critiques left market anarchists have increasingly leveled against communistic anarchists is that their prescriptions risk chaining us in the sociopathic quagmire so often seen in social anarchist scenes whereby power structures are just shifted entirely to the realm of popularity contests and team sports. Where almost every action is reduced to social positioning and triangulation.</p><p>The abstractions of property and markets provide some defense against this nightmare — the freedom to engage in relatively impersonal interactions can be incredibly important and necessary, as David Graeber has argued in The Utopia of Rules. He used this to justify bureaucratic systems like consensus meetings. But here questions of centralization crop up. Systems that appeal harder to organizationalism and collective decisionmaking than autonomous action inherently create effective concentrations of social power, capable of being seized and leveraged.</p><p>Decentralization, when paired with sufficient technological freedom/complexity that conflict becomes asymmetric to the benefit of minorities, provides additional security and resilience against power structures. And a general tendency within a mature and enlightened reputation market to move towards property titles would provide security against the horrors of raw social capitalism. One hopes a balance point can be reached organically, like a price, between the dangers of naive and immediate reputation games and the dangers of an overly rigid property system. Reputation is the soil in which we must cultivate a rich and highly-evolved ecology of social relations.</p></blockquote><p><a href="https://c4ss.org/content/41653">https://c4ss.org/content/41653</a><br /></p><blockquote><p>Indeed many left market anarchists have in the last decade taken to critiquing anarcho-communists on the grounds that markets provide less room for informal power dynamics, that they can make things clearer and more accessible and traversible to those autistics and the like who are systemically marginalized in the typical social capitalism of communal societies. This is new and productive work that I would love to see more discourse on. What we choose to invest cognitive or symbolic complexity in and what we simplify by default in order to explore complexity in other areas is a deep and important discussion for anarchists and there will obviously be no universal answers.<br /></p></blockquote><p><a href="https://c4ss.org/content/38077">https://c4ss.org/content/38077</a><br /></p></blockquote><p><p>I think you are wrong on this. And that weiz brings up a good point. </p><p>If you want an example of the kangaroo court type issues that would come up, I could do no better than point to the anarchist tribunal you discussed here <a href="https://socialjusticemunchkin.tumblr.com/post/147345188280/transformative-justice-and-practical-polycentrism">https://socialjusticemunchkin.tumblr.com/post/147345188280/transformative-justice-and-practical-polycentrism</a></p><p>I don’t think that was as positive an outcome as you do. From my perspective it seems like the overriding goal of that tribunal was to keep the case out of real courts, and the rapist in that case got off with a token at best penalty (pretty much don’t do it again). And I do wonder if they would have been anywhere near as generous . From that post of yours, “<i>Criminal justice would most likely have offered two outcomes: either the aggressor would’ve been sentenced to an ‘appropriate’ punishment, and lost years of his life and suffered significant harm while the survivors would’ve mostly gotten the schadenfreude of seeing the aggressor suffer; or alternatively he would’ve been declared not guilty, while many people would consider him ‘one who got off’ and the survivors would’ve received no justice at all</i>

” I don’t think its very clear that the solution you perform would perform better for society here.  In response to the first part of the quote, I still think deterrence/incentive alteration is a valid goal of the court system. The penalties on crime should be punitive as to discourage people from committing crimes in the first place.  As to the second part of the quoted portion, I doubt the decentralized legal system would handle cases with disputed facts much better than the mainstream court system (in this case though the facts seem pretty clear). In a case where there are disputed facts, I have a feeling that the tribunal would hop between coverups and railroadings with very weak protections for due process. Providing for a fair system<i> is a tough problem</i>. </p></p>