---
ID: 465
post_title: Trump is
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-03-02 04:34:07
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=465
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/146449534542/trump-is
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "146449534542"
---
<h2>Trump is…..</h2>
<p>* A bigot, a racist, and a sexist<br />
<ul>
<li>A person who’s political success is a reflection of how mangled political discourse has become<br /></li>
<li>A wakeup call to those who have ignored the growing political extremism and toxicity that has developed on both sides of aisle .<br /></li>
<li>The product of a political environment that has increasingly replaced the humane universal values of individual rights, personal freedom, and shared prosperity, with toxic tribalism.<br /></li>
<li>An opportunity for those who, on both side of the political divide, have made politics about out-group vilification and tribalism to see what they have wrought.<br /></li>
<li>The illustration of the most toxic parts of U.S politics<br /></li>
<li>An authoritarian who opposes fundamental parts of American civil liberties<br /></li>
<li>A nativist who seeks to deny the world the great benefits that increased immigration can bring the world.<br /></li>
<li>A protectionist who wants to unroll the benefits that trade and globalization have brought the world<br /></li>
<li>The product of an economically illiterate working class rage.<br /></li>
<li>An opponent of freedom of speech<br /></li>
<li>An opponent of freedom of religion<br /></li>
<li>The coming to roost of a politics, that on both the right and the left, has made civil liberties and freedom of speech the enemy.<br /></li>
<li>The product of those on both the right and the left, have weakened norms in favor of civil political discourse, in order to gain short term political advantage.<br /></li>
<li>The product of a toxic internet social media discourse which has elevated extremism to prominence.<br /></li>
<li>The product of a politics which on both the right and the left has forgotten that your enemies get to use any changes to political norms that you create, as they made political discourse more toxic.<br /></li>
<li>The reckoning of a feedback produced by thew most toxic elements of American politics debasing core parts of political civility.<br /></li>
<li>The product of movements, on both the right, and the left that have sought to destroy the possibility for political and social pluralism.<br /></li>
<li>Evidence that the core structure that has held the U.S political world together is starting to creak. There are effectively four major political movements in the U.S; liberals [in the international sense of the word, not the American definition] (mostly Clinton), the left (Sanders), conservatives (not-Trump GOP), and the right (Trump). The political agreements that have allowed stable coalitions between those groups are pretty rapidly falling apart, and irreconcilable differences are starting to pop up. Even though a two party system is pretty vastly favored by the U.S electoral system; I have a hard time seeing how it can remain stable. At least without a very massive realignment in what the parties believe.<br /></li>
<li>The reckoning of a form of activism, on both sides of the political divide, conducted with the explicit goal of eliminating the possibility of ideologically neutral spaces. One with the goal to force every part of society to take an explicit stance in the culture war to the exclusion of other possible ideologies. And its a very toxic turn. It eliminates the possibility of meaningful pluralism on cultural issues. It eliminates the existence of public squares that people of different ideologies can get together in. It turns all of politics into an us versus them, out-group versus in-group battle. It damages values that are core to the proper functioning of democracy, including freedom of speech. It encourages the vilification of political enemies.<br /></li>
<li>The worst thing to happen to American politics in a lifetime<br /></li>
<li>The candidate you should never vote for under any circumstances.</p></li>
</ul>