---
ID: 118
post_title: ""
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-10-10 18:25:11
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=118
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/151620546962/theunitofcaring-im-probably-way-too
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "151620546962"
---
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://theunitofcaring.tumblr.com/post/151617134901">theunitofcaring</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>I’m probably way too optimistic, but - most of the people I hear talking about the social justice/feminism culture wars talk about them like they’re really intractably bad, no middle ground anywhere, no safe way to opt out, destined to end with one side crushing the other entirely, lives and livelihoods constantly being destroyed in the meantime.</p>
<p>And, actually, this set of culture wars strikes me as the least zero-sum of all the ones I know of. The big culture wars issues of the last generation were abortion and school prayer. Abortion’s very zero-sum. Either you think it’s murder and want it illegal or you think that’s like grabbing people and demanding they donate their livers to save clumps of cells, right now, you’re a murderer otherwise. School prayer I have a hard time engaging with seriously as a culture war battlefield, even though I know it was one, but it’s also pretty zero-sum: one side getting what they want necessarily entails the other side not getting that. </p>
<p>All possible compromises were pretty tangential: can’t we all agree on more adoptions? sure, great. can’t we all agree that schools can give students a moment for reflective meditation? sure, great. At best these whittle at the edges of the culture war; at worst they satisfy no one and leave you exactly where you started, and I get the sense that’s usually what happened.</p>
<p>But whenever I try to engage with people in the SJ/anti-SJ debate I get this sense of astonishing vistas of unnoticed common ground. There are extremists on both sides who literally can’t arrive at a positive-sum compromise because the success of the other side is precisely the thing they’re upset about, but they’re minorities. Most people are scared and agree with half the other side’s goals but none of their rhetoric and are afraid if they achieve even their good goals they’ll use that as momentum to achieve their bad ones. Most people aren’t even clear on what the other side wants and it’s not that hard to describe it in terms that make them say, suspiciously, “oh, well, if that were really what they wanted then that’d be all right.”</p>
<p>Male birth control and more awareness that reproductive coercion is a form of domestic abuse? Positive-sum. Both sides want that. No more draft, even symbolically or as an irrelevant result of institutional inertia? Yup, please. Fewer people in prison, even though that means not sending some people there who really deserve it? Both sides want that (except when reminded that that means people who they <i>really really</i> think deserve it won’t be in prison.) People being less afraid of getting fired for things about their private life that have no bearing on their job? Positive-sum. Abusive behavior not being tolerated, and being characterized better so that people can recognize it, but also not being handled by callout posts and public fights? Positive sum. An end to the war on drugs? Positive sum. People are speaking incredibly different languages, but once you translate for them they want a lot of the same stuff.</p>
<p>And so I feel like we can win the culture wars. Not in the ‘my tribe tramples yours and salts the fields’ sense, in the ‘explain stuff well enough that people agree they want it, build enough trust that they accept that their enemies want it too, render irrelevant the people who are intractably opposed to their enemies being happy’ sense. I think it should be easier than achieving it would have been for the culture wars of thirty years ago. (I think it will still be really hard.)</p>
</blockquote>

<p>I disagree here. </p><p>Zero-sum versus non-zero sum doesn’t really have much to do with the political tractability of an issue. What does define the political tractability of issues are the level of tradeoffs involved. </p><p>Previous generation social issues largely involved very few serious tradeoffs. Sure, they were often such that one side lost while the other won. But on retrospect, they were such that one side was pretty much right and the other was pretty much wrong. The social value of eliminating formal, politically endorsed, discrimination against women was a large positive, same for the benefit of allowing gay marriage. </p><p>Modern social issues involve large tradeoffs between legitimate social values.  (Abortion is probably a rare intractable tradeoff issue from the previous generation of culture war issues).<br /></p><blockquote><p>“Fewer people in prison, even though that means not sending some people there who really deserve it? Both sides want that (<b><i>except when reminded that that means people who they really really think deserve it won’t be in prison</i></b>.)” <br /></p></blockquote><p>Emphasis added here to demonstrate the part I think shows the tradeoffs in that issue.</p><blockquote><p>“Abusive behavior not being tolerated, and being characterized better so that people can recognize it, but also not being handled by callout posts and public fights? Positive sum. “ <br /></p></blockquote><p>What tradeoffs between this goal and civil liberties are you willing to make? What groups of abuse victims do you want to give priority to (if any) in designing policy interventions?  The answers to those questions will show the politically divisive tradeoffs here. </p><p>School prayer and the (modern) debate over selective service are unique to the extent that they are very symbolism heavy. </p><p>The draft was de facto abolished because of reasons not due to gender issues but because of reasons of military strategy and economics (a professional army is simply <i>better</i> under the conditions of modern warfare). The remnant husk of the draft system is decisive in the culture war mainly because of the symbolism and the fact that the symbolism gives the worst tribalists on both sides a good chance to visibly desecrate the values and goals of the other side. </p>