---
ID: 117
post_title: 'I feel like you are a lot more optimistic than most on &#8220;People being less afraid of being fired for things about their private life&#8221; as a cause liberals would champion.'
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-10-10 18:58:19
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=117
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/151621837102/i-feel-like-you-are-a-lot-more-optimistic-than
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "151621837102"
---
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://theunitofcaring.tumblr.com/post/151620329831/i-feel-like-you-are-a-lot-more-optimistic-than">theunitofcaring</a>:</p>

<blockquote><p>I think liberals feel really strongly that a man shouldn’t be fired for bringing his husband to the office holiday party (or, like, acknowledging at any point in his career that his husband exists) or that a woman shouldn’t be fired for coming out as trans. And that, given this still happens in many, many places, leading to a really high unemployment rate for marginalized people, most liberals would be super happy to establish a sweeping norm against this which also insulated people from being fired for having Trump/Pence bumper stickers or donating to Prop. 8 or whatever.</p><p>Anyone out there who <i>disagrees:</i> if you would not press a magic button that eliminated discrimination in the workplace for being LGBT or gender non-conforming or wearing a headscarf or not wearing a headscarf or being overweight or being disabled or etc. etc., but also meant people wouldn’t be fired for privately holding political positions you disagree with, can you explain to me why this seems like a bad tradeoff? Is it that you think you can get all of the things you want without having to give any ground? Because you can’t, and in the meantime people are unemployed and homeless and forced to compromise between living a lie and not earning a living at all. If we could achieve this compromise it would be an amazing achievement we should throw a party over. </p><p>(Or is it that you don’t think getting bigots fired has any effect on the propensity of bigots to get your people fired, and we’re not deciding on a grand compromise, we’re taking discrete actions that should be evaluated on their own terms? Because, nah, I know conservatives who would be persuadable to disarm in this culture war or who would in fact switch sides if they saw you loudly and sincerely pressing for the compromise.)</p><p>(Or is it that you think people who privately donate to anti-gay-rights legislation continuing to be employed are more of a threat to the LGBT community than housing and job discrimination? Because that’s throwing away a bird in the hand for, like, a quarter of a bird in the bush. The bigotry is a problem because it concretely harms peoples’ lives; the solution is to fix the concrete harms to those peoples’ lives, not to allow those harms to keep going so you can punish the bigotry.)</p></blockquote><p><p>I don’t see any indication of why that compromise would be politically stable. </p><p>What you are proposing is less a positive sum policy and more horse trading two somewhat related policies to try to create a compromise. <br /></p><p>And a lot of the problem with current political polarization and populism is that horse trading together a bit of legislation in a smokefilled room is a lot less feasible than in the past. This is particularly so with culture war issues, which are almost uniquely polarizing. </p><p>Its pretty much clear, that in current political conditions even if you do get a compromise bit of legislation through, that the compromise will be thrown under the bus the minute that one side gets enough political strength to no longer need the compromise.  </p><p>The extreme left will throw such a compromise into the trash because you can’t tolerate the intolerant and because XKCD free speech cartoon arguement. The /r/the_donald type right will want to betray the compromise because they feel that it’s another instance of getting betrayed by sellout cuckservative losers. The extremes of both sides despise each other and have no reason to compromise and indeed find the whole idea of compromise a form of selling out to evil. </p><p><br /></p><p>Personally, my views on this are the following from best to worse </p><p>1. both employee anti-discrimination and free speech protections </p><p>2. just anti-discrimination</p><p>3. just free speech protections</p><p>4. status quo</p><p><br /></p><p>But 1 seems very impractical in the current political world.  </p></p>