---
ID: 145
post_title: 'It&#8230; seems like you&#8217;re might be making unjustified assumptions? Like, he specifically says earlier in the clip that he was turned down by a woman&#8211;it&#8217;s possible to say no to him. He also says &#8220;they let you do it&#8221; (i.e. she consents according to the consent process used by non-SJWs), &#8220;when you&#8217;re a star&#8221; (indicates that he kisses easily because he&#8217;s considered attractive and he wasn&#8217;t this way before getting famous). Plus later in the clip he verbally requests a hug from a woman.'
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-10-09 20:09:18
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=145
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/151575969007/it-seems-like-youre-might-be-making
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "151575969007"
---
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://theunitofcaring.tumblr.com/post/151571344421/it-seems-like-youre-might-be-making">theunitofcaring</a>:</p>

<blockquote><blockquote><p>/2 “what they’ll let you get away with without violently resisting” - Look, among ordinary heterosexuals it’s very common for guys to try to kiss girls and for girls to push them away with no hard feelings on either side. This is not “violent resistance”. This is normal non-SJW gender dynamics.</p></blockquote><p>I am familiar with a lot of different ways people navigate consent. I think you’re mistaken in imagining I spend all my time in a bubble with ‘SJWs’ - I don’t even know any in real life - and while I do by choice spend most of my time around rationalists and Orthodox Jews, both of whom in their own way take consent  seriously, I went to a normal American high school and to normal American parties.</p><p>At any of those, someone who bragged that they could grab girls by the pussy and ‘they let you do it’ would be bad news. That would not be someone deft at flirting; that would be someone who thought ‘she won’t fight me’ meant ‘I should go for it’ and ‘she’s not into it’ meant ‘try harder’.</p><p>It is very common to try to kiss someone and get nonverbally declined. It is not common to grab them by the pussy, it is not common to go for kisses - bragging “I don’t even wait” for them to show any signs of interest - and worry only about whether you can get away with it. </p><p>And, honestly, I think lots of ‘common gender dynamics’ I’ve witnessed <i>have</i> included sexual interactions that the people involved didn’t want. The fact that it’s common in many communities to navigate sex in a way that results in lots of unwanted sex doesn’t make it right. There are lots of parts of the world where consent isn’t acknowledged as relevant at all, where ‘people can decline sex they don’t want’ isn’t a <i>thing at all</i>, and I don’t think that has any bearing on whether we should condemn Trump. (Most people don’t think men can be raped, but they’re just <i>wrong</i>; if someone bragged about raping men I wouldn’t consider it remotely mitigating that ‘that’s how normal people think about it’.)</p><p>And my little brother is sixteen and wouldn’t even know what ‘SJW’ stands for and definitely hasn’t been exposed to consent-aware feminism and he was really insulted by the insistence that Trump’s behavior is how normal guys are because no, ugh, [he declines to specify how normal guys are because I’m his sister and ewwwww]. I bet that the average sixteen-year-old is more consent-respecting than Trump, and I worry that the ‘men are just like that’ response to Trump’s comments is unfair to all the men who are very much not like that.</p><blockquote><p>/3 “Is there any conceivable avenue for a woman who is not okay with being treated this way to signal disinterest, in Trump’s description of his own behavior?” YES. Listen earlier in the clip how he describes getting turned down!</p></blockquote><p>There are some people who, if you grab them by the pussy, will loudly and assertively say ‘fuck off’ and shove you off them. But the people who’ll instead freeze up aren’t therefore <i>consenting</i>. If you just straight-up walk up to someone and grope them, then they didn’t get a chance to say no, even if there are other circumstances under which you do flirt with people normally and accept getting turned down.</p><blockquote><p>/4 Charitable read: men like Trump are always going to speak with bravado and exaggerate in regard to their sexual encounters. Maybe he’s just making a point about how easy it is for him to get laid now. The assault accusations are a much stronger signal of being a lecherous douchebag.</p></blockquote><p>Agreed, but lots of people didn’t take the assault accusations seriously until they heard the man himself bragging about it, and I don’t think it’s a complete coincidence that the bragging sounded like bragging about sexual assault and also, like, there’s other evidence he committed sexual assault.</p><p> If he made comments describing sexual assault but no one had ever accused him of such, maybe you could say ‘he just chose crude language for normal interactions’. But when his language sure sounds like it’s describing sexual assault and separately lots of people have been saying for a long time that he sexually assaulted them and his first wife gave a sworn disposition that he raped her -</p><p>- the pieces sort of fit together, y’know?</p></blockquote><p></p>