---
ID: 452
post_title: Will Automation Cause a Resource Curse?
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-05-30 00:45:19
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=452
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/146449536577/will-automation-cause-a-resource-curse
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "146449536577"
---
<p>I just saw this old <a href="http://www.interfluidity.com/v2/4340.html">post on Interfludity</a> <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--1" id="enref--1">1</a></sup>, The generalized resource curse, linked from somewhere that I read. In that essay, Steve Randy Waldman argues that the growth in automation will cause a dynamic that is similar to the effect that natural resources have on developing economies. In what is known as the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_curse">resource curse</a>, economies with many natural resources — particularly ones that can be easily extracted like oil and minerals — tend to have sluggish economic performance. This is because the resource can be easily captured by corrupt officials, damaging both the economic and the political performance of the country, as the wealth contained in the resource is diverted to the personal coffers of the officials who captured it. Very few workers are needed to manage the resource and they have little bargaining power. Waldman predicts that a similar dynamic will happen with automation. Automation will create a form of capital that is very core to how the economy functions, requires very little labor to tend, and which can be easily captured. This will damage the overall political system. According to him, it will concentrate power in the hands of the people who own this capital.</p>
<p>However, I am not fully on board with this analysis. I have a few objections 1) the resource curse dynamic is really a phenomenon of authoritarian states, and democracies have largely avoided it, 2) the evidence shows that the dictatorship came before the cursed resource ie. a cursed resource can give a dictator political strength, but is unlikely to rapidly distort the political system of an established democracy, 3) the type of automation capital at question here is fundamentally different from natural resources in its ability to generate economic rents of the relevant kind, and 4) the type of dysfunctional political system common to resource curse economies is mutually contradictory with the requirements of advanced industrial production of the type that could produce an automation curse.</p>
<p>One of the favorite things I’ve read recently is the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Selectorate_theory">selectorate model of politics</a>, developed by Mesquita et. al. in their academic book <em>The Logic of Political Survival</em> and in their popular book <em>The Dictator’s Handbook</em>. In this model, there is a tension between a politician’s choice to provide broad-based services that benefit most of the population, and private goods that benefit the supporters of the politician. The same money can’t be used for both. Rulers in both dictatorships and democracies need to get support from others. The main difference in political systems is the number of people in the winning coalition of supporters that the politician needs to remain in power <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--2" id="enref--2">2</a></sup> . The cost of providing private goods scales with the number of people in the winning coalition and the cost of providing public goods scales with the size of the total population of the country. This means large coalition governments (ie. well-functioning democracies) are much more likely to spend on public goods than small collation governments (ie. dictatorships). As Mesquita et. al. note <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--3" id="enref--3">3</a></sup>, this has a direct role in explaining the resource curse. The types of resources behind the resource curse provide an efficient source of steady revenue for the dictator. When a dictatorship has a cursed resource in its country this revenue can be diverted for private goods adding strength to the dictator’s government. But a democracy will tend to use its resources to fund widely beneficial goods. This means that, based on a theoretical perspective, one would expect democracies to be a lot less prone to resource curse dynamics.</p>
<p>When the level of political freedom of the country is taken into account the resource curse goes away, and resources become a benefit. I wrote an R script to calculate the correlation between oil production and human development index <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--4" id="enref--4">4</a></sup>. But, I adjusted this for the level of political freedom measured by <em>The Economist’s</em> Democracy Index, and for <a href="http://slatestarcodex.com/2016/04/02/beware-regional-scatterplots/">spatial autocorrelation</a> <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--5" id="enref--5">5</a></sup>. There was a strong <em>positive</em> correlation between development and oil, once this was done. <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--6" id="enref--6">6</a></sup> Code and results embedded at the end of the post.</p>
<p>And the possibility that cursed resources cause the formation of dictatorships is also lacking in evidence <a href="http://economistsview.typepad.com/economistsview/2008/07/the-perplexing.html">as noted by Mark Thoma</a> <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--7" id="enref--7">7</a></sup>. While institutions are not improved by oil wealth, they are not harmed either.</p>
<p>Additionally, the resource curse is closely tied to the possibility of economic rents produced from oil. Wealth from oil is effectively free, as long as you have the oil on your land. Dysfunctional institutions don’t really harm oil production. The same can not be said of the type of manufacturing at question in Waldman’s article. The production of that type can not go on if institutions are bad. Government policy can destroy the manufacturing base.</p>
<!-- more -->
<p><br /></p>