---
ID: 55
post_title: 'What is your understanding of rape culture? I&#8217;ve heard people throw this term around but never felt like I properly understood it. People get upset about rape jokes &#8211; which seems fair as they are potentially insensitive, but I&#8217;ve also seen people accuse men of objectifying women and contributing to rape culture for what seems like little more than stating they are attracted to specific women. As a man, how can I be attracted to a woman without objectifying her?'
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-10-19 05:15:54
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=55
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/152012169132/what-is-your-understanding-of-rape-culture-ive
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "152012169132"
---
<p><a href="http://theunitofcaring.tumblr.com/post/152009043081/what-is-your-understanding-of-rape-culture-ive" class="tumblr_blog">theunitofcaring</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p><a href="http://consulo-cuniculos.tumblr.com/post/151997495202/what-is-your-understanding-of-rape-culture-ive" class="tumblr_blog">consulo-cuniculos</a>:</p>
<blockquote><p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://theunitofcaring.tumblr.com/post/151988996776/what-is-your-understanding-of-rape-culture-ive">theunitofcaring</a>:</p>

<blockquote><p>Rape culture is a word for the social norms and social pressures that:<br /></p><p>1) make it cool/affirming/masculine to brag about sexually assaulting women</p><p>2) treat it as embarrassing/trivial/hilarious to sexually assault men</p><p>3) automatically leap to assuming that people who talk about being sexually assaulted are liars/attention-seeking</p><p>4) distinguish between ‘real’ rape - the victim is not promiscuous, she is a woman, she was sober, she was raped by a stranger, she fought back, she reported the rape, she had no record of any kind of conduct that could be spun to call her dishonest - and other rape - the victim is a man, or promiscuous, or dating his rapist, or didn’t fight back, or was drunk, or had a criminal record, or didn’t come forward right away. </p><p>People who think like this will often say at length that rape is evil and rapists should rot in prison and how could they be said to contribute to rape culture when they hate rape? But if the victim fails to qualify for the right standards of purity or the crime didn’t fit narrow understandings of what rape looks like, they consider it totally unacceptable to ‘ruin peoples’ lives’ over a ‘small mistake like that’. This is how rape culture can coexist with people talking about how terrible rape is.</p><p>And while I’m at it, things that are not rape culture and things that are rape culture:</p><p>1) Having standards in criminal court that make it really hard to convict in rape cases because it’s so hard to prove a lack of consent beyond a reasonable doubt is not rape culture. However, assuming that unless there was a conviction in criminal court the victim is lying and using things like ‘the victim contacted his rapist after the rape’ or ‘the victim didn’t come forward right away’ as proof the victim is lying (when those are well-known to be things that victims of rape do) can be part of rape culture.</p><p>2) When Bob says “Alice raped me” it is not rape culture to say to yourself ‘okay, I don’t have enough information to make judgments about what happened, but I can listen to Bob and respect that Bob wants to be warned if Alice will be around, and I can resist the urge to play judge and jury and defense attorney’. It does contribute to rape culture to say to Bob ‘why would you accuse Alice of something like that? you’re tearing apart our community. Are you sure it wasn’t just a misunderstanding? Maybe you’re abusive to Alice, did you think of that? What exactly happened, were you sober, why didn’t you push her off?’ </p><p>2) Being sexually attracted to people, even in an objectifying way (a woman sits down in front of me; knowing nothing about her personality I think damn she’s hot I’d be all over that) is not rape culture. Believing that, because you are sexually attracted to someone, you ‘can’t control yourself’ or ‘deserve a chance’ or ‘have to just go for it even if he’s not interested’, is rape culture.</p><p>3) Saying to a friend ‘oooh I’d fuck her’ is not rape culture. Saying ‘I don’t even ask, I just grab her and kiss her, when you’re famous they let you do it’ is bragging about sexual assault. It’s encouraged by others and made light of when it comes to public attention because of rape culture, which says that it’s <i>manly</i> to be ‘unable to control yourself’ and indifferent to consent.</p><p>4) Talking about what behaviors increase or decrease risk of sexual assault is not rape culture (lots of this talk is very misinformed, though). Saying ‘if your partner ignores your boundaries on small things, they’re likelier to ignore your boundaries when it comes to sex’ or ‘getting blackout drunk increases your risk of being assaulted’ is not rape culture. Suggesting that, because someone failed to take all available steps to reduce their risk of being sexually assaulted (or even, gasp, prioritized other things over reducing risk of being sexually assaulted), they ‘couldn’t really have expected better’ or ‘should have known that actions have consequences’ is rape culture.</p><p>5) Seeing someone and fantasizing about them is not rape culture. No matter how detailed or inappropriate your fantasies get. There are no thought crimes. There’s no ‘related behavior which is rape culture’ for this bullet point because there are no thought crimes. (With respect to objectification: if you can only think about someone as a sexy thing you want to have sex with, or alternately as a perfect embodiment of pure romantic love without personality traits beyond perfectness, and you can’t keep in mind that they might have desires of their own and career aspirations and emotional needs, you will probably be unpleasant for them to interact with and they are vanishingly unlikely to want to date you. This is a separate problem from rape culture but it does crop up.)</p><p>So, go ahead and be attracted to women. Rape culture is the forces at work in our society that say if you’re really a man you won’t care if they’re consenting, you can’t stop yourself from having sex with them merely because they’re not into it, you’re a loser if you back off just because you hear a ‘no’, and you can’t yourself be raped because men always want sex. Rape culture is being told that all men are like Donald Trump and are constantly bragging about how much sexual assault they can get away with. Rape culture is the fact that many of the people you know have been sexually assaulted and won’t come forward because they don’t want to weather endless debate about whether they deserved it. It is harmful, and it’s probably harming you as well, but it’s made out of pieces far more concrete than thoughtcrimes and attraction to women is not the harmful piece.</p></blockquote><p>Glad to see in your hurry to make Timely Political Commentary you completely omitted the fact the term originated to describe the systemic coercive function of rape in prisons, you fucking hack</p></blockquote>
<p>Everything I can find on the history of the term ‘rape culture’ suggests it was coined by second-wave feminists to talk about, among other things, the widespread non-acknowledgment of marital rape. Can you recommend me any reading on rape culture as it relates to prisons? Whether or not that played a role in the origins of the term it seems like a good context to discuss it in.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>I just went over to google scholar and did two searches </p><p>1.<b> <i>“rape culture” prison</i></b> limited to works first published at or before 1980 — this search brought up almost nothing. A few papers about rapes at womens’ prisons, and a few very old works that weren’t using the phrase in anything resembling the modern sense. </p><p>2. <b>“rape culture” </b>limited to works first published at or before 1980 – brought up the set of feminist oriented papers you would expect (this search done mostly to confirm that google scholar had a lot of papers from relevant sources from that timeframe indexed) </p><p>So, at least in the academic literature, the feminist use was established before the prison reform use. </p>