---
ID: 463
post_title: Problems with Social Media
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-03-15 03:26:26
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=463
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/146449534927/problems-with-social-media
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "146449534927"
---
<p>I think there is a big issue in the structure of Twitter, Facebook and other social media content silos. These services try to be a jack of all trades, and wind up being a master of none.</p>
<p>There are five roles that a communication service can fulfill,</p>
<ol><li>1 to 1 communication between two individuals (ie. personal email)</li>
<li>one to many communication (ie. a newspaper)</li>
<li>a group of like-minded individuals coming together to discuss a matter of common interest (ie. an Internet forum for conservatives)</li>
<li>a community of people with, disparate views to come together and discuss those differences (ie. a broader focus Internet forum)</li>
<li>core infrastructure that serves a bunch of unrelated users with different interests and goals (ie. a webhost).</li>
</ol><p>Your typical content silo tries to be all five, and this creates a lot of problems, and tensions.</p>
<h3 id="differing-expectations-and-sealions">Differing Expectations and Sealions</h3>
<p>This creates people with different expectations of what type of community they are dealing with. There are a lot of different communities and users with different goals. And sometimes these communities don’t get along. The structure of social media systems forces them into the same silo. This creates perverse outcomes.</p>
<p>Have you heard of the concept of sealioning? It refers the the tendency of a comment made on Twitter on a controversial subject, to attract a negative response from partisans on the issue. If you make a Tweet on a controversial subject, people will try to respond to you , and this can create some hostile dynamics. The phrase originates from <a href="http://wondermark.com/1k62/">a cartoon by David Malki</a>. In the cartoon, one character insults sealions in a conversation with another character. An anthropomorphic sealion then enters the conversation, and requests that the insulter justify the comment, and follows the insulter home.</p>
<p>The phrase <a href="http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/sea-lioning">came to prominence</a> during the whole #GamerGate shitshow. But it describes a situation that has preexisted that tirefire, and which still happens on many other issues. <a href="http://inthesetimes.com/article/18850/kind-of-discourse-we-need">Take the 2016 presidential election</a>, and the discussion about it on Twitter. Support a candidate, or oppose one vocally on Twitter, and you run the chance of getting a negative response from the partisans for that candidate. The supporters of both Trump and <a href="http://www.vox.com/2016/2/4/10918710/berniebro-bernie-bro">Sanders</a> are particularly known <a href="http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/10/here-comes-the-berniebro-bernie-sanders/411070/">for their aggression on social media</a> .</p>
<p>And then there is the strongly related phenomenon of the <a href="https://medium.com/@randileeharper/solving-twitter-dogpiles-7d7b102116c8#.f1q6hlo5i">Twitter dogpile</a>. In a dog-pile, someone writes a tweet that gets a lot of attention from other tweeters. Those angry at the offending tweet then send their responses to the original tweeter. The result is a flooding of the original tweeter with angry messages.</p>
<p>The tension between the different roles of Twitter is where the sealioning, dogpiling, and related issues comes from. Twitter (and other social media platforms) is at once functioning as a public forum for public discussion, and at once as a personalized medium. And its not navigating that impasse very well.</p>
<p>Remember the original cartoon. The sealion followed the person who insulted the sealion home home. And that’s what the people who complain about sealioning think is happening. Their vision of the purpose of Twitter is one in which they are dealing with like-minded people, or broadcasting their ideas to people who agree with them. Their conception of what Twitter is marks off 1,2,and three on my roles of a communication service, but they aren’t using Twitter for roles 4 and five. They look at their notifications and, like the sealioned person in the cartoon, see someone intruding on their home. Meanwhile, the person who is responding to the Tweet, thinks of Twitter as a way for people with disagreeing viewpoints to interact, and therefore thinks it is perfectly fine to rebut the person talking about how evil sealions are.</p>
<p>Considering the structure of Twitter, both have a point. The situation is at an impasse, and the structure of the platform tries to suit all possible uses at the expense of fulfilling none of them.</p>
<h3 id="censorship">Censorship</h3>
<p>This also creates some of the controversies over censorship. Social networks are in large part acting as core infrastructure, while also serving as content and communities on top of that infrastructure.</p>
<p>There are communities, and there are protocols. Infrastructure means there must be what in a decentralized system would be a protocol for communication. Protocols tend to have a strong tendency towards natural monopolies due to network effects. A communication protocol is only useful to the extent that other people are using it. Unless there are very strong intensives the other way, you will use the most popular protocol. The market will therefore become quite concentrated and non-competitive.</p>
<p>This has happened on lower levels of Internet-based protocols. Gopher lost the competition to HTTP. And so on.</p>
<p>In the pre-social media world, there was a separation between the communities themselves and the This website is a discrete community, and the VPS I host it on implements various protocols to allow users to get access to the content. But, as long as everyone agrees on the protocol itself, there can be competition on the higher levels of the system. There can be many blogs and fora with different owners served over HTTP. There can even be competition on the infrastructure level.</p>
<p>The multiple roles of most social networks serve to combine protocol with implementation. This makes the type of diversity of different communities and implementations that dominated the pre-social web impossible. It serves to concentrate substantial power over the Internet and the discourse that happens on it into the owners of these systems.</p>
<p>And its important infrastructure. Social media sites contain so much of Internet discourse that if your opinion is blocked from them, then you are at a severe disadvantage in getting it out. They are so powerful that by taking sides on political issues they could alter the discourse on those issues quite a bit. Its safe to say that both Sanders and Trump are social media candidates– if social media wasn’t available to them, then they couldn’t sustain their campaign solely on traditional media. FiveThirtyEight has a <a href="http://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/facebook-primary/">post up showing the social media mentions of each candidate for president</a> , if you want a visualization of this. Major social media websites taking sides on political issues could very quickly alter the whole political discourse of the country. Social media services and other Internet infrastructure.</p>
<p>The real problem and controversy comes from the dual roles of social media —- Twitter/Facebook/Tumblr isn’t purely infrastructure. They are also communities. The infrastructure role of these services pushes them in the direction of needing ideological diversity and tolerance for a wide range of varying viewpoints.</p>
<p>The community-like nature of these pushes them in the other direction.</p>
<p>This is in large part because the different communities can affect each other. If my webhost also hosted a neo-nazi blog, it wouldn’t affect my site very much. The neo-nazis could read their site, and my readers could read mine. But if a bunch of neo-nazis started using Twitter, then there would be clear leakage on the other users. And this could damage the reputation of Twitter. One remark that I’ve seen a few times on this issue: If a bunch of Hells Angles start attending your bar, then you become a Hells Angles bar unless you kick them out. If you are in the same tightly knit Internet community as some pretty terrible people – then those terrible people are going to affect you. Again an impasse created by the dual roles of Twitter.</p>
<h3 id="toxic-communities">Toxic communities</h3>
<p>The big social networks also tend to have some pretty nasty issues with toxic subcultures, and sub-communities. Tumblr is probably the worst in this vein. The site’s fandom and social justice sub-community wars have given the site a name in the broader Internet community.</p>
<p>And on Twitter you get toxic groups forming a collective group and becoming a menace to other users. This type of issue is definitely seen with tire-fires such as #GamerGate where you get a whole sub-community form that is a big dump of toxic on the rest of the users of the system.</p>
<p>The same leakage issue created by dual roles that I mentioned earlier applies here. When you have toxic neighbors, its hard to avoid their effects on your usage of the service.</p>
<p>But the multiple communication services roles problem creates another issue here. It becomes very difficult for the sub-communities to self-moderate. In a proper Internet forum the ban-hammer is always a option, and in well functioning communities often applied. Due to the broad,based infrastructure-like roles of the social networks, the banhammer is applied very lightly. Sub-communities can not eject their malefactors. The Bernie Sanders supporter community on Twitter can not eject the toxic berniebros that engage in crude and sexist behavior. If instead of Twitter, they were on an Internet forum dedicated towards their politics – the gentle, warm glow of the banhammer could be applied to these types. Both the reputation of the wider community and the ability for proper discourse to happen is greatly damaged.</p>
<h3 id="path-forward">Path Forward</h3>
<p>In the short run, social media services can address this issue by <a href="https://medium.com/art-marketing/putting-out-the-twitter-trashfire-3ac6cb1af3e#.8mten26a4">adding features</a> to their services that allow users to have more control over the messages they see. This control can allow users to adjust the nature of the service as used by them so that it is better suited to them. This could take the form of opt in filtering, options to adjust the user interface, options to suppress notifications, and opt-in blocklists.</p>
<p>However, this type of adjustment will not work in the long run . I think these problems are an inherent problem in the design of current social networking services, one that will eventually lead to their decline, and replacement with services that handle each type of Internet communication more individually. Solving these structural issues will 1) require returning to the decentralization of the pre-social media web, 2) replacing current social networks with general protocols, and 3) creating separate protocols for each major type of communication .</p>
<p>The reason Twitter type services gained popularity is more their ease of use, then their structure. Users want a presence on the web, one that is personalized, and that allows them to connect with others. The old, pre-social network web, had fewer of these issues. All of the major communication functions were well-separated. Discrete communities were isolated.</p>
<p>The problem here was ease of use. Getting an Internet presence outside of the use of social media services takes substantial technical skill. Skill that most users do not have. The first feature that a good social network replacement should have is ease of use.</p>
<p>Decentralization is also important. Current centralized social networking websites, such as Facebook have many flaws. They have persistent privacy issues and breaches. Their moderation policies are often problematic and applied arbitrarily. These systems are vulnerable to censorship and government manipulation. The risks of this to privacy are shown by the NSA leaks. The risks to <a href="http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2238519/Facebook-bans-picture-woman-reclining-bathtub--shows-elbow.html">free speech are shown by how, when under pressure from the Turkish government Facebook restricted posts advocating</a> Kurdish independence and “Any attack on Ataturk [Turkey’s first president]”. With a centralized structure these issues of government interference are almost unavoidable. The nature of these networks also means that there is little ability for the user to modify and customize the interface because all of the code runs on the server, and because this code is not open source. This is part of the reason why Facebook has to roll out interface changes to all users, often with many dissatisfied users. Some projects have tried to improve the Facebook interface by running client-side software that modifies the HTML and JavaScript produced by Facebook, but this method is error prone. A distributed social network built around a single protocol that allows different implementations of the system, running on different servers would fix these issues. A decentralized social network would lessen all of the issues I discussed. If individuals run their own servers, governments would have a hard time controlling these servers. A decentralized system would allow many different implementations and configurations of the system to run. The users would be allowed to choose from the configuration that best suits their wants. They would also be able to chose from different hosts of the system.</p>
<p>A path forward will require the creation of new services that implement the flexibility of the old web, with the ease of use of modern social networking services.</p>