---
ID: 245
post_title: 'So I read your tags on the &#8220;calculus&#8221; thing about Leibniz or Newton, and wasn&#8217;t Archimedes also hugely involved? Like, I know he was killed before he could finish it and I&#8217;m unsure if his work was actually used later as far as it went, but I think I remember my teacher saying he was one of the first.'
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-09-09 23:51:18
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=245
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/150187512957/so-i-read-your-tags-on-the-calculus-thing-about
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "150187512957"
---
<p><a href="http://matan-matika.tumblr.com/post/150184728721/so-i-read-your-tags-on-the-calculus-thing-about" class="tumblr_blog">matan-matika</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p><a href="http://janothar.tumblr.com/post/150168456351/so-i-read-your-tags-on-the-calculus-thing-about" class="tumblr_blog">janothar</a>:</p>
<blockquote><p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://janothar.tumblr.com/post/150168239096/so-i-read-your-tags-on-the-calculus-thing-about">janothar</a>:</p>

<blockquote><p>Ok, it’s time for a bit of a trip, because people always say shit like “Newton invented calculus” or they swap out Leibniz, and MAYBE, sometimes they’ll mention Archimedes.  Science, including math, doesn’t work that way.  It’s incremental.  The bits and pieces of what we now call “calculus” were developed over a LONG period of time by many different people.</p><p>So before we begin, calculus is the study of a thing called a “limit” which is a way of doing infinitely many things.  There’s two main parts of calculus: differential calculus, which uses limits to talk about rates of change, and integral calculus, which uses limits to talk about areas and volumes.</p><p>Ok, now, to Archimedes.  He developed what was called the “method of exhaustion.”  You want to know how much area is in a circle? First, fit a triangle inside the circle.  You can figure out it’s area.  Then a square.  Then a pentagon, and take the number of sides bigger and bigger, and the more you have, the closer it is to being the whole circle.  In modern terms, you compute those areas, and then you take the limit as the number of sides goes to infinity, and BAM, area of a circle (which is also a way to calculate pi, and there’s fun history there, too)</p><p>Now, we jump a thousand or so years, because Archimedes got stabbed and, frankly, people had to figure out polynomials, modular arithmetic, and geometry a bit more before the next part of calculus was really popular.  We come back to the story with Descartes.  He said “We can describe the plane by pairs of numbers!” and it was AMAZING.  Suddenly, geometry was freed from Euclid and was dominated by numbers.</p><p>So what’s the first thing you do in that case? You try to compute the lengths of some shit.  Like spirals, parabolas, etc.  Descartes came up with some tricks, but he declared that no one would be able to do it for cubics, WAY too hard.  Never ever.</p><p>So of course, not long after he died, Fermat did it.  Fermat figured out how to compute the rates of change (slopes of tangent lines) for any curve that was defined by polynomials.  Any at all.  And how to use that to figure out the length, though some lengths couldn’t be computed cleanly, he could still calculate them pretty damn well.</p><p>This is actually about 60-70% of what you need to get through a calc course.  All thanks to Fermat, who often gets no credit for it.</p><p>So then, a BUNCH of people start working on area inside of curves, and Isaac Barrow (Newton’s teacher) figures out that rates of change and areas are closely related: there’s a thing called the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus that is the details, and it’s REALLY important.  But of course, he can only do things for polynomials, really.</p><p>And now Newton comes along, and he systematizes it, and says “Well, not all functions are polynomials…OR ARE THEY?!” and declares that all functions are just polynomials with infinitely many terms, and you can just treat them the same way.  Neither of these statements is true, but they’re not the worst things you could say.  So now, Newton could handle all the functions that show up in classical physics…and BOOM, physics revolution, though he hides the calculus for various reasons.</p><p>Leibniz, possibly unaware of how Newton got his results, figures out how to do things more generally, treating functions as just things, not as big polynomials.  He developed the product rule (also called the Leibniz rule) and his notation was WAAAAAY better, and then, the shit hit the fan when Newton found out.</p><p>It’s one of the nastiest academic disputes ever (take into account that Newton was basically a supervillain and in charge of England’s money supply), but it’s a bit off topic.</p><p>So, we’re now at about 80-90% of a calc course, and the rest was filled in by the other European mathematicians and physicists of the time, with a LOT of work replicated in England and on the Continent because of this dispute.  We tend to remember the Brits, because, well, we’re Americans, but also because Britain was getting more powerful at the time.  So we have Maclaurin and Taylor who cleaned up the “infinite polynomial” business standing out particularly.</p><p>The Continent had its revent in the 19th century, when people found out “Oh, shit, these proofs, they all have holes in them” and it was Cauchy (French) and Weierstrass (German) among others who fixed it all up.</p><p>So, hope you enjoyed this lesson in history of math, next, ask me about the Jewish woman who made her father (who was one of the great 19th century mathematicians) a completely forgotten name whose work is often attributed to her by accident, and who completely revolutionized our understanding of physics, and who is, honestly, one of my favorite historical people ever (bonus point if you know who it is)<br /></p></blockquote><p><a class="tumblelog" href="https://tmblr.co/mw9BWh2FjeUtYcqkQjaiuVA">@matan-matika</a> you might enjoy this</p></blockquote>
<p>The history of math is full of fascinating stories.</p>
<p>The craziest part about the history of calculus is how much earlier we had a practical way to use limits and infinities well before Cauchy and Weierstrass actually tamed infinity from philosophy into math.</p>
<p>And by that I mean “in the about 200 years between the inventions of Calculus and Analysis (the math underlying Calculus), the biggest critique of Calculus were that it was on unsound footing.” And this was strongest among <i>theologians</i>.</p>
<p>And then in the 19th C, the craziness of taming infinities and limits was still seen as radical. It was deeply unsettling that we can do math with things that don’t keep proportion like how things in Euclid’s world did. As in, a conservative professor of math wrote his hatred of trying to use this radically dynamic new math into one of the most famous children’s books of all time (Alice in Wonderland).</p>
</blockquote>