---
ID: 280
post_title: 'Things Which Are Scary: Reproductive Freedom Edition'
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-08-08 23:50:13
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=280
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/148662642957/things-which-are-scary-reproductive-freedom
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "148662642957"
---
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://wirehead-wannabe.tumblr.com/post/148661177068">wirehead-wannabe</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://socialjusticemunchkin.tumblr.com/post/148643082930">socialjusticemunchkin</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p><a class="tumblr_blog" href="http://ilzolende.tumblr.com/post/148630736237">ilzolende</a>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Reproductive freedom sounds like such a lovely idea on paper, but then you think of the children, and then you think of the third parties who will either think of the children or not do that, and then you think of the increasing difficulty of enforcing not having it, and gah.</p>
<ul><li>Alice would like to genetically engineer children in some direction that leads to a wildly reduced risk of reporting abuse.</li>
<li>Bob values his inclusive genetic fitness terminally. He is going to produce as many kids/clones/etc as he can get away with, regardless of whether or not he can personally support him.</li>
<li>Carol really doesn’t like the idea of children starving to death. She would like to neither eventually have a future where everyone is a descendant of Bob nor watch Bob’s children die in the streets.</li>
<li>Dave thinks the whole situation would just be resolvable if people could only have kids after demonstrating they could pay for 18 years of food and shelter. Accordingly, Dave wants everyone to be sterilized and for embryo-producing tech to be strictly controlled, and anything which could vaguely be converted into a means of sterilization reversal or produce an embryo to be strictly controlled, and so on.</li>
</ul><p>I am not even sure that I have clear questions here. I’d like to think that I’ve outlined the problem or at least pointed at it. I’m not even sure it’s fair to just ask transhumanist anarchism-adjacent types about this problem, given that “how do we regulate it without being a totalitarian mess” is also a big problem, but I feel like I’d need more coherent questions before I can ask anti-transhumanism yay-states people about it.</p>
<p><a class="tumblelog" href="https://tmblr.co/moMFSRWKg1nNYHWq6CRASzQ">@socialjusticemunchkin</a> because it seems like you’ve thought about this already, maybe, and are the sort of person who writes essays about this sort of thing<br /></p>
</blockquote>
<p>The simple solution is to scorn Alice and Bob and coordinate people’s exercise of their freedom of association to disincentivize such things. Dave is frighteningly totalitarian but he’s perfectly free to sterilize himself; if he tries to sterilize others he’s at risk of getting rightfully defended against.</p>
<p>There’s an economical solution which isn’t very soft but is rather elegant and one which I <i>might</i> support in an environment of rational actors.</p>
<p>We split the future light-cone in around 10 billion parts of equal value and every person has their own. These shares and parts of them can be traded voluntarily but trying to coercively take the resources of someone else’s share warrants nuclear retaliation. The shares are inheritable (an obvious consequence of them being voluntarily transferable) but new people are only entitled to the fraction of the universe’s resources they have inherited or otherwise voluntarily acquired. (In fact, one might make the argument that by creating children one also acquires an obligation to share one’s resources to them because the children didn’t consent to being born to abject poverty.)</p>
<p>Thus every new spawn Bob creates will only reduce the resources available for the other bobspawns (and Bob himself) without impacting anyone else’s resources and Bob’s clever strategy for maximizing fitness ends up hurting it instead because every bobspawn requires a certain amount of bob-lightcone’s resources just to sustain its existence. Bob will end up poor as fuck and his descendants won’t get any more of the future than a smaller number would’ve gotten.</p>
<p>(This is also an argument in favor of child support in an environment with adequate reproductive freedom. Currently we don’t have it, but if procreation was a very distinct deliberate consensual choice separate from sex or anything else I would be more sympathetic to expropriating people’s resources to support those they have chosen to bring to existence yet neglected to provide for.)</p>
<p>What I think of Carol is that there’s a certain decision-theoretic reason to HTFU. Bob can blackmail Carol into taking care of bobspawn, and the amount of children starving in the streets will be lesser if Carol doesn’t respond to blackmail. Thus Carol needs to clearly deny Bob her services as an unwilling ATM for bobspawn. Shoot the hostages if necessary so nobody will have a reason to take hostages. In practice Carol should ally with the starving bobspawn to expropriate Bob’s resources. If Bob creates more children than he’s capable of taking care of, and his resources aren’t enough to compensate, I would say that letting him choose sterilization as an alternative to debt bondage would be fair. (This doesn’t mean this argument should be extended to any present-day political debate because the situations and the actors involved are so dramatically different.)</p>
<p>I’m sympathetic to Dave’s argument but it’s rather inconsequential because neither I, nor Dave, nor anyone else has any right to pre-emptively sterilize anyone against their will, or to impose controls on technology that doesn’t pose hazards to third parties. I agree with Dave that it might be a good thing if it was done, but I’d still shoot him if he tried to do it because no you don’t get to do it just because it might be a good thing if it was done. It might also be a good thing if everyone gave 1% of their income exceeding poverty level to me because I would spend it better, but I still don’t get to take it from them. That’s just how it works.</p>
<p>But all of this is just pretty abstract theorywanking. The practical solution would be to seek to establish and uphold a culture of reproductive freedom and responsibility. Contraception and sterilization, reversible and irreversible alike, would be trivially easy to access, and it would be a default norm to be sterile unless one specifically wants to have kids. Abortion would obviously also be unrestricted.</p>
<p>(My evil side is suggesting that making irreversible/not-cheaply-reversible sterilization into a choice that’s cheap and easy to make would be likely to have positive consequences as there’s probably a statistical correlation with the people who would get irreversibly sterilized impulsively and later regret it, and the people who would have kids they can’t support. Dave could subsidize such sterilizations if he wants as long as nobody is getting defrauded. If it’s done with informed consent it’s not Dave’s fault if the person changes their mind 10 years later, and trying to protect people from their own choices only leads to gatekeeping and other such inhumane bullshit.)<br /></p>
<p>There’s nothing anti-freedom in having optimal default choices, such as everyone with testicles getting RISUG and everyone with ovaries getting [whatever the ovary-owner-equivalent is] at puberty if they don’t choose to opt out. It’s not as serious as vaccines; I think it would be perfectly fair for everyone to dis-associate from those who don’t vaccinate themselves/their kids without a very serious reason; but some amount of subtle and soft social pressure in the direction of responsible choices is okay to me.</p>
<p>When it comes to Alice, I would say that the abolition of the nuclear family would help a lot. It’s aberrant for children to be stuck with one or two parents who dominate their lives, without meaningful community where exit rights etc. would be actually exercisable. The privacy of the nuclear family, the property-status it reduces children to, the “none of our business” attitude to the suffering of some children because they “belong” to others, the coercive returning of runaway children to their custodians, the legal and economic and cultural dysfunctions that render better alternatives artificially difficult, and other such things, are massive enablers of abuse. It takes a village to keep parents in check. There needs to be a free market in families so children can choose which they want to belong to. I’m not even kidding. Polyamory is a step in the right direction, but so many things need to be changed so that better things can exist.</p>
<p>The kind of communal living I see as being probably relatively optimal is currently really difficult because of the strict segregation to “private” which belongs to one individual or family and “public” which is open to everyone; the closest one can get is to share a huge house/apartment but that one mostly just expands the size of the family with its own “private” space instead of creating a fluid continuum from private to communal to public. A lot of social alienation and other shit results from this.</p>
<p>The existence of such meaningful communities (voluntarily, of course) would reduce poverty and the costs of having families. Childcare would be basically a non-issue, as would be caring for sick or elderly people. The division of labor and ownership of tools would be far more optimal as small economies of scale could be exploited. Social safety nets for individuals would be rather inherent, people who create immaterial value would probably be compensated more fairly, and people whose monetary productivity is low could still contribute in the chosen-family-community instead of having to choose between bullshit jobs and living on handouts. And children would be able to genuinely choose their families, which is important for preventing abuse.</p>
<p><b>Nuclear families are illegitimate monopolies on parenting.</b></p>
<p><b>children. are. not. property.</b></p>
<p>A lot of anarchism is about culture because in the absence of coercive authorities the vital importance of culture becomes obvious; if you take two different populations with vastly differing cultures and give them the same de jure rules the outcomes are going to be vastly different. It also applies in statism, people just tend to gloss over the cultural questions (eg. ”how you treat people of group X”) because laws act as a decoy (”will there be an anti-discrimination law for group X”) which saps their attention and effort.</p>
<p>In fact, anarchism itself <i>requires</i> a culture where people don’t reflexively demand authorities to solve all their problems because otherwise they will just create the authorities they mistakenly think they need. Individual empowerment, non-violent conflict solving, decentralized structures etc. are rather vital for any society that seeks to minimize coercion and violence. A lot of the time when there’s a problem people tend to respond to it with “what kind of rules there should be” when they should be thinking “how do we solve this problem” because people have been thoroughly conditioned and propagandized into the idea that <i>only</i> rules and authorities can solve problems. (Of course, this isn’t <i>surprising</i> as it keeps the authorities in business and thus the evolution of authorities will inevitably tend towards those that are the best at manufacturing consent.)</p>
</blockquote>
<p>“The practical solution would be to seek to establish and uphold a culture of reproductive freedom and responsibility. Contraception and sterilization, reversible and irreversible alike, would be trivially easy to access, and it would be a default norm to be sterile unless one specifically wants to have kids. Abortion would obviously also be unrestricted.”</p>
<p>I don’t see how this works in the long term. What are you going to use to enforce responsible reproduction? Currently, we have the ability to do things that make life unpleasant for the parent but not the child, but after a few rounds of selection you will have just created a population of people who evolved to not respond to that sort of thing. Then you’re stuck with a choice between leaving them alone or doing things that harm Bob’s children in order to reduce Bob’s fitness. And even if you go with something like painlessly sterilizing his kids, I guarantee you that people will evolve to find your painless methods incredibly painful, such that you feel like a monster for enforcing them.</p>
<p>I don’t have a solution to this problem, but I’m frightened by how many people seem not to take it seriously.</p>
</blockquote>

<p>I see no reason why the harm principle shouldn’t apply to the decision of if medical therapies should be banned.  Yah. If some form of gene therapy emerges that allows someone to create a wildly deformed child doomed to unhappiness, then its use in that way should be banned. </p><p>In a more incendiary note, a lot of the wildly overbroad interpretations of medical autonomy come from the abortion issue being a mind killer. Under most variants of consequentialism,  the harm principle is sufficient to preclude banning abortion because of the low level of neurological development of the fetus. But this is not fully airtight logic and has some legitimate counter arguments. People don’t want to admit that the issue is somewhat complicated.   So, you get stuff like the violinist argument; that would preclude 1) a lot of current medical regulation (sometimes rightly so), and 2) would be impossible to consistently implement without very undesirable results (see the above thought experiments).    </p>