---
ID: 451
post_title: On the Gawker Media Case
author: theojones
post_date: 2016-05-31 00:05:18
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://microblog.theojones.name/?p=451
published: true
tumblr_theopjones_permalink:
  - >
    https://theopjones.tumblr.com/post/146449536717/on-the-gawker-media-case
tumblr_theopjones_id:
  - "146449536717"
---
<p>The Gawker Media lawsuit involving a leaked sex tape of Hulk Hogan brings up some interesting issues relating to freedom of the press, particularly after the involvement of billionaire Silicon Valley entrepreneur Peter Thiel in spending 10 million dollars to fund the lawsuit came to light. Valleywag, a gossip publication owned by Gawker Media, outed Thiel, and Thiel wanted to find a plaintiff who has grounds to litigate against the publication. Richard Waters at the Financial Times covers this case <a href="http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/3ecb9de6-23b6-11e6-aa98-db1e01fabc0c.html">here</a>  <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--1" id="enref--1">1</a></sup>. Scott Greenfield at Simple Justice has written a number of essays critical of the verdict, most recently, <a href="http://blog.simplejustice.us/2016/05/26/peter-thiel-hero-of-the-big-lie/">this one</a> <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--2" id="enref--2">2</a></sup>. <a href="http://www.pragcap.com/three-things-i-think-i-think-weekend-edition-7/">Cullen Roche deals with the case here</a> <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--3" id="enref--3">3</a></sup>.  The case is pending appeal, but Gawker Media lost 140 million dollars in a jury verdict — enough to force the company into bankruptcy. Gawker Media owns a number of large websites, including, celebrity gossip blog Gawker, advice blog Lifehacker, feminist blog Jezebel, gaming blog Kotaku, and automotive blog Jalopnik <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--4" id="enref--4">4</a></sup>. I am of two minds on this case. On one side Gawker’s content is pure garbage, and the publication has a business model of publishing content as scandalous as possible and in skirting the lines of ethics and legality in doing so. It very well may have crossed the line in the Hulk Hogan case. However, particularly when the involvement of Thiel is included, the case provides a mechanism by which public figures can destroy a publication that prints stories which are critical of them. It should be very hard for someone of public prominence to win litigation versus journalists — even tabloid ones. Additionally, this issue tends to be magnetic to hypocrites of many types. Free speech advocates who in most cases would defend Gawker, but who are clearly motivated by disdain for the publication’s political views and clearly protected speech in their interpretation of this case <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--5" id="enref--5">5</a></sup> are common. And then there are people who agree with the publication’s opinions in other areas, but who are defending in in strong contrast to how they handle other issues. <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--6" id="enref--6">6</a></sup></p>
<p><strong>Legal Background</strong> </p>
<p>A lot of the popular coverage of the Gawker Media case focus on privacy rights. But for the most part, those were secondary to the actual litigation. The courts have been very hesitant to establish privacy as a free standing exemption to free speech. In practice, most of the Gawker litigation was over 1) publicity rights , and 2) the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress. Publicity rights are a type of intellectual property right that allow an individual to control how his likeness is used in the media. They are similar to trademarks. Out of the two possible justifications, the publicity rights ones is probably the strongest of the two. And as to the large damage awards, remember, Hogan is a celebrity with a large economic value contained in his brand + punitive damages. Gawker was rather open in flaunting Hogan’s privacy in this case, and pretty clearly didn’t give a shit about the law. To make matters worse about a month after the Hogan case Gawker published editorials condemning other celebrity nude leaks — meaning they outright knew their actions were legally dubious and unethical. That’s not endearing to a judge and jury — and willful intent to harm gets penalized more than negligence. And damages are counted in large part on the economic damage caused. Hogan has a marketable brand in his name, and this was damaged by the leak of the sex tape. The damages are in part to make up for that. It looks like 1/3rd of the damages were for the direct economic damage to him, and the rest were punitive. </p>
<p><strong>The Thiel Intervention </strong><br />
Theil’s intervention in this case doesn’t worry me too much, although the idea could be taken in some negative ways by others. <a href="http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/435937/peter-thiels-crusade-against-gawker-threat-free-speech">As David French notes</a> <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--7" id="enref--7">7</a></sup>, what Thiel did wasn’t too different from what many activist groups do on a regular basis. Thiel wanted a legal environment that was more hostile to the type of clickbait emitted by Gawker. He found a test case that could advance this goal and funded it. One could question if his goal was the right one in this case, but that is for the courts and the political process to decide. </p>
<p>However, Thiel’s intervention in the case came pretty close to the boundary of acceptability, and may cause others to act in ways that truly cross the boundary due to the visibility of this case. You could imagine a world in which he was more aggressive in finding cases (ie. if he combed through all of Gawker Media’s activities and solicited the possibility of litigation with everyone who may have a grievance with Gawker. Or you could imagine a world in which the quality of the litigation was much lower. Thiel didn’t cross this line, but I expect others to in the near future. </p>
<p><strong>Here is the side of me that is against Gawker</strong></p>
<p>Gawker Media’s coverage on most issues tends to be one of these<br />
</p><p><a href="http://giphy.com/gifs/fire-dumpster-26FPy3QZQqGtDcrja">via GIPHY</a></p>
<p>Gawker Media sites have been toxic little outfits that regularly take a dump on peoples’ privacy, and emit nasty outrage peddling on the media landscape. Its political publications have probably damaged the landscape of political discourse quite a bit. They very well may have finally taken things too far into the world of illegality, and now are paying the price. On the other hand, Gawker may have been 1) infringing on copyrights, publicity rights, and other areas outside of the zone of protected speech, 2) not really furthering the public debate on government policy or anything else that comes under a justification for its actions. This means that a lot of the usual justifications for strong freedom of the press go out of the window. Gawker was hardly publishing the Pentagon Papers, and may have (if the trial court ruling is upheld) doing an activity that is actually illegal. </p>
<p><strong>….But</strong><br />
It is clear that a lot of Gawker Media’s stuff crossed the line of social acceptability. But whether it crossed the legal line, and whether the verdict aginst Gawker will be upheld is uncertain.  You can imagine cases where similar material can be perfectly news-worthy (ie. Anthony Weiner). You don’t want a legal system that discourages that type of coverage. It may be useful to distinguish between those in the public spotlight and private figures with little news worthiness. Criticisms of those in the public spotlight are very valuable even if trashy at times. And it should be very hard to litigate aginst even the trashiest of content in such debates, so as to avoid creating a chilling effect on all of discourse. It is also worrisome to see that the Gawker Media controversy has brought out some dangerous ideas regarding free-speech. The freedom of speech is not freedom from consequences people (particularly when the consequences here are state-enforced), and the people who dismiss the free speech implications altogether (ie. the one liners I’ve seen on FB like “freedom of speech means that the best you can say for your action are that they aren’t actually illegal”, and “defending Gawker in this case is like using freedom of religion to defend Kim Davis” <sup class="endnote"><a href="#en--8" id="enref--8">8</a></sup>). Such sentiments are very dangerous to the future of political discourse. </p>